H1043Z Individual Project
Log Book
STUDENT NAME Zouqi Chen
CANDIDATE
NUMBER 269877
PROJECT TITLE Vision-based Hand Gesture Control of a Robotic Arm
SUPERVISOR Prof. Yanpei Huang
For Academic Year 2024-25

---PAGE BREAK---
2
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - June/ 16/ 2025
The final project discussion began, and we were exploring which topic would be more suitable.
Supervisor suggested exploring human: machine interaction (HMI) in robotic systems, especially
for medical or assistive applications.
Student expressed interest in gesture: based control as it combines computer vision, real‑time
processing, and robotics—all aligned with previous coursework. We considered available hardware:
the lab has a Leap Motion controller and access to MATLAB/Simulink for simulation.
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - Jun/ 30/2025
After discussing with Prof. Yanpei Huang and based on the previous research analysis, the
final graduation project topic has been determined as:
Vision-based Hand Gesture Control of a Robotic Arm
Visual gesture control falls within the cutting-edge direction of human-computer
interaction (HMI), and has a clear application prospect especially in the fields of medical
and rehabilitation robotics. The feasibility of this project is attributed to the availability of
the Leap Motion device in the laboratory and the mature MATLAB/Simulink simulation
environment, with the overall technical stack risks being manageable. In terms of time
management, this project can complete the entire process from literature research, system
design, algorithm implementation to simulation verification within a one-year cycle, with
an appropriate workload.
Its academic value lies in the ability to systematically explore key issues such as gesture
mapping, tremor filtering, and real-time control, ultimately resulting in a complete
technical report and simulation outcomes. Additionally, this direction integrates computer
vision, robot control, and human-computer interaction design, aligning closely with
personal technological development trends, and is conducive to the enhancement of
comprehensive capabilities.

---PAGE BREAK---
3
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - July/ 14/2025
After determining the research topic, this week we had a discussion with Prof. Yanpei Huang, our
supervisor, about the key directions for the initial literature review.
Gesture perception and tracking technology
Key points:
1. Performance comparison and application scenarios of visual sensors such as Leap Motion,
Kinect, and RealSense.
2. Method for detecting key points on the hand and calculating joint angles
3. Multi-sensor fusion technology (such as the dual Leap Motion extended field of view)
4. Hand tremor detection and filtering algorithms (such as EMD, Kalman filtering)
Objective: To clearly define the gesture recognition solution to be adopted for this project and its
technical basis.
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - July/ 28/ 2025
This meeting mainly focuses on sharing relevant literature.
Gesture perception and sensor technology serve as the data source and hardware
foundation of visual gesture control systems. Through literature research, it can be known
that the current mainstream gesture perception devices include Microsoft Kinect, Intel
RealSense, and Leap Motion controllers, etc.
Among them, Leap Motion stands out in near-field fine gesture tracking due to its high
spatial accuracy (about 0.2mm), high frame rate (120 FPS), and relatively reasonable cost
(about $199), especially suitable for scenarios with high precision and real-time
requirements such as surgical robots. In contrast, Kinect has a larger field of view but
lower accuracy and frame rate, while RealSense achieves a balance between cost and
performance but is more suitable for medium to long-distance perception.
Therefore, this project selects Leap Motion as the core sensor and plans to expand its field
of view through multi-sensor fusion strategies when necessary, in order to ensure high
accuracy while enhancing the operational space and robustness of the system.

---PAGE BREAK---
4
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - August/ 11/2025
When conducting literature research, an efficient strategy of "from review to specifics" is
adopted: Firstly, on academic platforms such as IEEE Xplore and ScienceDirect, by adding
keywords like "review" and "survey" or directly filtering the types of literature, search for
high-quality review papers related to the topic.
Carefully read the abstracts, conclusions and sections on research status of the reviews,
which can quickly grasp the overall context and technical classification of the field; at the
same time, directly extract the key references that are repeatedly cited, especially the
cutting-edge work within the past three years, to form the first batch of reading lists.
Additionally, trace the series of research by authoritative authors and utilize the "Cited by"
and "Related articles" functions of Google Scholar to expand the literature network.
By combining keyword combination search and reference to open-source projects, this
strategy can systematically build the theoretical foundation of the topic in a short period of
time, avoiding the risk of blindly reading extensively, and thus providing precise and
cutting-edge literature support for the subsequent systematic design.
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - August/ 25/ 2025
Gesture recognition and classification methods are the core for achieving intuitive human-
computer interaction. Current research mainly focuses on two major directions: traditional
feature methods and deep learning. Traditional methods extract features such as hand joint
angles, position coordinates, and movement speeds, and combine classifiers like support
vector machines and random forests to achieve real-time recognition.
The annual vacation for the supervisor ends on September 15th.

---PAGE BREAK---
5
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - September/ 22/ 2025
Purchase details of the Leap Motion device, process confirmation.
Submit the equipment purchase form.
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - Oct/ 21/ 2025
The equipment has arrived. Prepare to set up the debugging environment.

---PAGE BREAK---
6
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - Nov/ 3/ 2025
The environment has been debugged. Carefully analyze the code related to device data
collection based on the open-source code on Github.
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - Nov/ 17/ 2025
The mid-term report begins. Suggestions for writing about the "project specification"

---PAGE BREAK---
7
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - Dec/ 1/ 2025
The writing and communication of the interim report, including how to write the literature
review and the Risk Assessment section.
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - Dec/ 15/ 2025
At the beginning of the project, a new program for measuring the range of motion of the
test subject's fingers should be added to be used for the subsequent threshold
determination.

---PAGE BREAK---
8
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - Jan/ 12/ 2026
The threshold program has been designed. The final project of the thesis will shift from
controlling a simulated robotic arm to controlling a real one.
1.13
Communication regarding the operation and pre-preparation of the robotic arm.
1.19
Received the robotic arm, and started preparing to set up the debugging environment.
1.21
Debugging the VMware virtual machine.
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - Jan/ 26/ 2026
Debug the robotic arm according to the website address.
https://cloud.tencent.com/developer/article/2528040
Installation Miniconda3 according to document.
1.28
As of this day, the Lerobot control environment has been assembled. Next, the servo
motors will be installed.

---PAGE BREAK---
9
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - Feb/ 9/ 2026
Re-design the hardware communication lines, abandon the previous complex operations
such as virtual machines, and start from the very basics.
When conducting hardware adaptation in the MATLAB environment, it was found that the
driver board used is of the Waveshare brand. Although this board is capable of driving
Raspberry Pi hardware, MATLAB does not provide a dedicated driver for Waveshare
products (if it were an official Raspberry Pi driver board, MATLAB could operate it
directly). By consulting the product information provided on the Waveshare official
website, it was discovered that the driver board comes with a direct Python operation
example for ST series servos and includes a Python control library for directly connecting
to ST/SC bus servos. Therefore, utilizing MATLAB's functionality to call Python libraries
makes it feasible to control the servo through this approach. If this solution is adopted,
there is no need to use the existing library from the Huggingface/Lerobot open-source
project provided by the senior.
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - Feb/ 23/ 2026
The meeting is cancelled during the Spring Festival holiday.
2.28.2026
Install the Python environment on a Windows computer. Re-download Python and add it to
the Windows environment variables. Steps to activate the virtual environment:
https://www.waveshare.net/wiki/Bus_Servo_Adapter_(A)#.E5.BC.80.E6.BA.90.E9.A1.B9.E7.9B.AE
Take this website as an example. Note: After opening the terminal in cmd, enter the bold text
to enter the virtual environment:
cd "C:\Users\sting\Desktop\Matleap2so_arm_control\STServo_Python"
The "CD" folder in the website refers to the specific address of the ST servo driver library.
Due to system decompression issues, double-layer folders may occur during decompression,
which can prevent the virtual environment from being established. Simply delete one layer.
All virtual environments will be completed by 3.3.2026.
3.5
Test the port. The actual input port is COM3. However, when testing the official WIKI
example, it was found that the original ping.py example in STServo was for the SC series of

---PAGE BREAK---
10
servos, not the ST series. After DS teacher's modification, the original SC series related parts
were changed to examples applicable to the ST series.
New modified program: Changed ping.py to st_ping.py
The servo port drive and read program was completed, and the ID1 servo was successfully
connected. However, during the test, it was found that the servo could only be read but could
not execute the READ or Write program, possibly due to insufficient voltage.
3.7
The voltage issue has been resolved. Please try reading and writing again.
The servo can finally rotate! A big step forward. AI summarized why it wouldn't move:
During the debugging process, several key points were discovered:
Method name mismatch: Previously, attempts were made to use methods such as
ReadVoltage and ReadTemp, but from the method list of the sts class, it can be seen that
these methods do not exist at all! The only actually available methods are:
ReadPos - Read position
ReadSpeed - Read speed
WritePosEx - Write position (with acceleration)
And some synchronous write, latch, and other methods.
The correct servo mode: Read the register through the read1ByteTxRx method to confirm
that the servo is in the correct servo mode (value 0), which is a prerequisite for rotation.
Normal communication: The Ping test has been successful all the time, indicating that there
is no problem with the hardware connection.
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - March/ 9 /2026
Simple progress, but still a problem: How to transfer data to the robotic arm in the most
straightforward way?
Option 1: Pure Matlab transmission
Feasibility: Theoretically feasible, but you need to rewrite the servo communication code
Workload: High - Reverse engineering the communication protocol of the Python library
and re-implementing it in Matlab is required.
Risk: High - Timing, checksums, and protocol details of serial communication are prone to
errors.
Debugging difficulty: Difficult. If there's a problem, it's hard to tell if it's due to the
algorithm or the communication.
Option 2: Pure Python Control
Feasibility: Feasible, but your Matleap is the Matlab version.
Workload: High - Hand data acquisition needs to be re-implemented in Python.
Risk: Moderate - Matleap is ready-made, rewriting may introduce new bugs.
Debugging Difficulty Moderate - Accuracy of hand data needs to be re-verified.
Option 3: Combining Matlab and Python

---PAGE BREAK---
11
Feasibility: Most feasible - only need to "connect" two ready-made modules.
Workload: Small - only need to implement data transfer, approximately 20-50 lines of code
Risk: Low - no changes to the core code on either side, only adding a layer of
communication.
Debugging difficulty Low - can test the visual part and the servo part separately.
To make the project a complete project package, a new complete startup program was
rewritten.
start.bat
Double-clicking on this project will start all the virtual environments.
In Python, I wrote a server that can complete data transmission with MATLAB and added
the gripper and wrist pitch functions. So far, the basic concept of the project has been
realized.
3.14
A small experiment was carried out using this project, which involved grasping the target
object and moving it to a designated location.
3.15
Conduct experiments with multiple participants and record videos for subsequent
presentation.
Week–by–week record of project work
Week Commencing - March/ 23 /2026
Dissertation writing until 4.15